Theory: HTML basics

1. What is HTML?
HTML is language used to create web pages: It manages
their structure and content. HTML is an abbreviation, it
stands for HyperText Markup Language. HyperText refers to
text information that is connected to other texts through
links, weaving together this interconnected spiderweb of
pages.

Here is simple visualization of what hypertext is . It should
look more than familiar to you, an experienced Internet user.

Markup language helps the browser recognize text
information and serve it to the reader in a convenient form.
There are other hypertext markup languages, but the vast
majority of pages on the Internet are written in HTML.

2. Short history
HTML was developed by Tim Berners-Lee, a member of the
Swiss scientific laboratory CERN. The release of the first
HTML version is attributed to 1989. In 1991 the language was
supplemented and began to be used to transfer hypertext on
the Internet. Initially, HTML was created for data exchange
between scientists within the same institution.

If you are curious, you can still visit the first HTML site
created on August 6, 1991. For many years it had not been
available, but in 2016 the site was restored.


3. HTML today
Today sites written in HTML look a lot different from the first
one. You probably stumble upon them every day - look at
this one, for example:

You can make sure that HTML is indeed responsible for the
structure of the page by opening its source code. It's very
easy to do: right-click and find the View Page Source line or
simply use the CTRL+U key combination, and you'll see
something like this:


Billions of people see the results of their browser's
interpretation of HTML documents every day on their
computers and mobile devices. Even though the main
readers of HTML are browsers, any person can easily
understand its structure since this language is simple and
logical, yet knowing it well often helps a great deal in
today's world.

4. Advantages of HTML
HTML has gained popularity due to its undeniable
advantages:
- The language is easy to learn and use;
- It is supported by all common browsers;
- It can be integrated with programming languages.

Tim Berners-Lee, the creator of HTML, once said: "The Web
turned data into the gold of the 21st century". Expanding this
metaphor, we can say that HTML is a primary tool for mining
and storing the precious metal.
