Theory: Starting with Git

In this topic, we will start exploring Git, the essential tool to
control and merge your code versions. We will learn what Git is,
why we need to use it, and how to install it on the three major
operating systems.

What is Git?
Git is a distributed version control system that helps developers
track and record changes in the files. These can be any files one
wants to work with, but we will take a closer look at the source
codes of programs. With Git you can rollback to an older version
of your project, compare it, analyze and merge changes. This
process is called version control.
Git is distributed, that is, it doesn't depend on a single central
server that stores files. Instead, it works entirely locally, storing
data in folders on your hard drive called a repository. This is the
local repository, existing only on your hard drive. However, you
can keep a copy of it online, which makes it a lot easier for
multiple people to work on the same project. In that case, it is a
remote repository.

A number of services provide hosting for Git repositories,
among the most famous are GitHub, Codebase, SourceForge,
SourceHut, Bitbucket, GitLab and Gitorious, but it was acquired
by GitLab in 2015. Further, we will discuss only GitHub as the
most popular among these resources. Anyway, if you want, you
may use others listed above instead.

Git is a free and open-source software primarily developed on
Linux but it also supports most major operating systems,
including macOS and Windows. Now we will learn how to install
Git on these systems.

Git is a free and open-source software primarily developed on
Linux but it also supports most major operating systems,
including macOS and Windows. Now we will learn how to install
Git on these systems.

2. Installing Git
1. Windows
There are several ways to install Git on Windows. First, you can
go to the official Git site, and the download will start
automatically, After installation, you need to select the options
you need in the settings.

For unattended installation, you can also use the Git Chocolatey
package.

Another easy way to install Git is to install GitHub for Windows.
Its installer includes command-line utilities and GUI Git. You
can download GitHub for Windows from the GitHub Desktop
website.

2. Linux
You can just open a terminal and install the application using
your distribution's package manager. If you have Fedora (or
another similar distribution such as RHEL or CentOS), you can
use dnf:

$ sudo dnf install git-all

If you have a Debian-based distribution like Ubuntu, try apt:

$ sudo apt install git


3. macOS
There are several ways to install Git on Mac.

You may install the Xcode Command Line Tools by typing the
following command in your terminal:

xcode-select --install

Then you cna simply check if Git is already installed:
$ git --version

If Git is not installed, you will be prompted to install it.

The other way is to use homebrew, which can be installed from
the terminal using the command below:

/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/master/install.sh)"

More information on homebrew can be found on the homebrew
official website. After installing it, run in the terminal

brew install git

You can also install Git when installing GitHub for Mac. Their
GUI Git tool has an option to install command line tools as well.
You can download the GitHub client for Mac.

3. Git settings
So, we have successfully installed Git, now we need to adjust
some settings. There are quite a few options to play with, but
we'll set up the most important ones: our username and email
address. Open the terminal and run these commands:

git config --global user.name "My Name"
git config --global user.email myEmail@example.com

Now each of our actions will be marked with our name and e-
mail address. Thus, users will always know who is responsible
for certain changes: this brings order!

4. Git check
Usually, the installation is successful, but just in case, we
recommend you to check that the latest version of Git has
actually been installed by running the git --version command
in the terminal. The result will be the following:

git version 2.17.1

This means that the Git is installed and you can start working
with it.


5. The Conclusion
Let's sum up what you've learned in this topic:
- Git is a set of console utilities to store, control, change and
  merge your codes.
- You can easily install it on Windows, Linux, or macOS.
- With Git you can keep your projects either locally on your
  hard drive or using an online service.

Now, since you are familiar with Git, you might be interested to
discover more about it in the next topics, But first, let's get to
some tasks!