Theory: Basic syntax

CSS has its own code rules. The syntax of this language is not
complicated: it is a list of parameters responsible for the design
of elements on the page.

Basic CSS syntax can be schematically described as follows:

selector { property: value; }

CSS syntax consists of two main parts: a selector and a
declaration block that is put in curly brackets. Let's look at them
more closely.

1. Selector
Selector indicates which HTML elements the styles will be
applied to. For example:

h1 { color: red; }

In this case, the style will apply to all <h1> elements on the
page. The text of the <h1> elements will turn red.

You can write multiple selector separated by commas, and all
styles specified in the declaration block will be applied to them.
For example:

h1, p { color: red; }

Here, styles are applied to two HTML tags at once. All <h1> and
<p> elements on the web page will have a red text color.

2. Declaration block
Declaration block contains one or more declarations separated
by semicolons. Several declarations look like this:

div {
    width: 500px;
    height: 50px;
    color: yellow;
}

In this example, three styles are applied to <div> elements
simultaneously: specify width equal to 500 pixels, change the
height value to 50 pixels, and make the entire text yellow.

Each declaration includes a CSS property name and a value
separated from each other by a colon.

Property determines what exactly will be altered: background,
text color, position on the page, or something else. The value of
a property is a kind of refinement of what it will be change to.
Each property has its own individual set of permissible values.
We will learn about the most common properties and their
permissible values in the following topics. Take a look at another
example:

span { font-size: 25px; }

In this case, font-size is a property to the elements
and 25px is the value. As you probably guessed, here we
change the font size to 25 pixel in <span> element.

        Declaration blocks are always enclosed in curly brackets.

3. Conclusion
Here's the deal: there are numerous existing CSS properties:
more than 500! One can't possibly memorize them all, so if you
forget something, do not hesitate to simply look it up. It's
alright, really, as even the most experienced developers refer to
guides and resources! The important thing is to grasp the basics
of CSS syntax. Let's make sure you do!


