Theory: What is CSS
Web pages written solely in HTML tend to look somewhat
boring and monotonous. Such pages simply fail to draw
attention to the content because visitors get lost in a bunch of
elements without much good design. Perhaps Hypertext Markup
Language alone was enough to amuse Internet users in early
90's, but now they've grown pickier and harder to impress.

The first version of the HTML standard did not provide any
means to manage the appearance of the information.
Interpretation of the appearance relied entirely on the styles
built into the browser. The urgent need to give sites personal
designs prompted HTML to add "enhanced tags" which allowed
for broader control over how the information is displayed. As a
result, HTML code became difficult to understand because of
the terrible mixture of logical and design tags.

To separate markup from design management, CSS was
developed. This division made code simpler and cleaner,
reducing the duplication of lines. CSS (Cascading Style Sheets)
is a language responsible for the visual presentation of
documents written in HTML. CSS allows changing the colors of
the elements, their height and width, the location of individual
blocks, background images, and much more. CSS files are saved
in .css format.

To date, the latest version of this technology is CSS3. It even
has its own logo:

A web page made with CSS would be drastically different from
the very same page created without it. See for yourself in the
following example:

1. Why use CSS?
CSS got really popular, which makes a lot of sense when you
think about all its benefits:
- It makes HTML pages more beautiful.
- It saves developers time. You can write a CSS file once and
  then connect it to several HTML pages
- Pages load faster. Instead of writing the same property to
  different HTML elements, it is enough to write one CSS
  rule and apply it to several elements at once. Less code
  means faster loading time!
- It's compatible with multiple devices. Style sheets allow
  you to optimize content for more than one type of device.
  Using the same HTML document, you can present different
  versions of a website for computers, laptops and
  smartphones.
- Last but not least, it is supported by all latest browsers.

2. Short History of CSS
Here's a short history of CSS for those interested in details.

The concept of cascading stylesheets was proposed in 1994 by
Hakon Wium Lie, a Norwegian scientist and IT specialist
working for the W3C consortium at the time.

The first version of CSS (CSS1) was published only as a
recommendation in 1996. In that version it is possible to control
the size of the font and change its style to or from italic and
bold. One could also draw frames around the blocks, change the
background, change the colors of the text, align tables and
images and much more.

CSS2 was released in 1998. That version allowed you to control
the location of elements on the page and set different styles for
different media. For example, it became possible to display the
same web page with an individual design for computers,
printers, and mobile phones.

CSS3 appeared in June 1999. The main feature of CSS3 is the
ability to create animated elements without using programming
languages.

3. Conclusion
CSS is most often used as a tool to describe and design the
appearance of web pages written using markup languages. CSS
is powerful tool, and it's frankly difficult to imagine modern
web sites without it. This technology can change the
appearance of HTML pages - for the better. Web pages after
CSS touch-up look magical. Let's master this magic together!


